Note: This document is revised from time to time.   If you are reading
this from the install iso, be aware that there may be a newer
version of this document in www.github.com/cruxppc/cruxppc-ng-3.6/iso/doc.

Release Notes for CRUX PPC 3.6
01/19/2023

   This page discusses the relevant changes introduced in CRUX PPC 3.6.

   This is the CRUX PPC 3.6 release.   

   In this release update, various packages have been updated to their most 
   recent versions.   No functional changes have been made.

   
  Supported machines:

   Apple 32bit "NewWorld" G4 and (in theory) G3 machines are supported.  In 
   practice however, most of building and testing of CRUX PPC 3.6 is 
   performed on G4 machines, and G3 is only minimally tested.

   PowerMac G5 64bit PowerPC machines are also supported.   

   CRUX PPC does not support multi-lib.   CRUX PPC 64bit is pure 64bit
   and does not support for 32bit libraries.   
  
   The 32bit release works best on G4 machines with Radeon graphics.   It can
   be installed and used on G3 machines and/or non-Radeon graphics
   machines but there are some additional difficulties with the latter
   machines.
  
   Machines which have an NVIDIA card may particularly have problems and
   even getting just a command line interface working on such machines
   may be problematic.
  
   Older G3 machines with ATI Rage graphics cards don't start a GUI desktop but
   otherwise function as expected.   
  
   A minimum of 256Meg RAM and a few Gig of disk space is required to 
   install CRUX PPC 3.6.   Even 128Meg RAM might work but after install,
   the user may want to build additional packages and lower RAM machines
   may not work well when building additional packages.
 
   Non supported machines: Non-Apple PowerPC.

  Toolchain updates

   CRUX PPC 3.6 includes glibc 2.32, gcc 9.5.0 and binutils 2.35.2

  Kernel

   Linux-5.4.72

  Important changes

   CRUX PPC 3.6 is a new port of CRUX 3.6 to the PowerPC.  There is no support
   for upgrading from any earlier CRUX PPC releases to 3.6.  Likewise, 
   future CRUX PPC releases will not likely support upgrading from this
   release, so make notes of any local configuration changes made so
   that your changes can be remade when installing later CEUX PPC releases.

  Miscellaneous notes

   Please be sure you are using the  latest version of firmware for your  own
   machine.  If you are converting a MACOS machine to a Linux only machine, be 
   aware that Linux does not provide the firmware update tools and so you may
   wish to update the firmware before wiping out MACOS.

  Known issues and usage notes


   A few warnings will be displayed during boot of the install CD.   These do not
   cause the install to fail and can be ignored.  

   CRUX PPC does not provide .signature checking on the ppc specific packages.
   Nor in this release is md5sums checking provided.

   It is not uncommon for the footprints to mismatch when building on powerpc.
   Generally a footprint mismatch is benign but may halt package building tools.
   The package build utilities provide an option to ignore footprints.  Also
   /etc/pkgmk.conf can be adjusted to ignore footprints by default.   A
   footprint mismatch is not necessarily indicative of an actual problem in the
   build.

   The contents of /usr/ports/core-ppc, opt-ppc, xorg-ppc, and contrib-ppc
   are not automatically updated when 'ports -u' is run.  When updating ports,
   in additiona to running 'ports -u',  the user will have to manually pull 
   the contents from this repository and update their /usr/ports/*-ppc 
   directory with any changes.

   On some monitors, the left most characters are not visible.  In most
   cases, this can be resolved by resetting to default on the monitor
   controls.  However this does not always work.   Until this
   is solved, a workaround is to install the xorg server packages and then
   run 'startx'.  The xorg server provides a rudimentary set of windows
   and the whole output will be visible.   Enabling ssh access to the 
   machine and using it to access the machine is also a workaround.

   The monitor resolution may be set incorrectly when starting X windows.   
   This can be worked around with an xorg.conf file.

   X windows do not work on the imac G3 machines (ATI Rage graphics).
   X seems to be running but screen is blank.   A fix is not known
   yet but an xorg.conf or possibly a kernel change may be what is 
   needed.  The ATI driver is not even present on the install CD.   If 
   you want to try it, find the package for it under xorg-ppc and
   build and install it.

   When starting the LXDE desktop, an error box pops up with 
   a "cannot connect" type of error message.  Simply close the
   error box.   The fix is unknown yet but the desktop seems to
   function properly and so the error message is likely benign and
   can be ignored.

   On G3 machines, netsurf seems to occasionally lock the screen for
   some seconds (maybe 10 seconds or so).   Then it becomes responsive
   again.   In general, performance on a G3 is not very good although
   it will run if you are patient.

   The midori browser does not seem to function properly with https
   connections (on ppc only, works fine on x86..).  Until this is solved, 
   it is best to not spend the (long) time needed to build it and it's
   dependency chain.  

   None of the browsers perform really well.  Not even on a fast G4
   machine.   netsurf and arcticfox seem like the best of the available
   browsers but even they can be sluggish or not work properly with
   some websites.   seamonkey builds but seems to be broken for now.

   On G3 ibook, the console window switch key sequences (alt-f1,f2,etc) 
   don't work.   X-windows and/or ssh sessions an be used if more
   than one login session is needed.

   All of the applicable core packages, most of the opt and xorg packages
   have been built on powerpc but only a subset of contrib packages have been 
   built with CRUX PPC.

   When using CRUX PPC on G3 hardware a few packages may need to be
   rebuilt natively on the G3 machine in order to function properly.
   If a package causes illegal instruction exceptions, it may need
   to be rebuilt on the G3 machine to function properly.   

   CRUX PPC 3.6 provides gcc 9.5.0 rather than the more recent 
   gcc 10.2.0.   The build of nss (on 32bit at least) failed with
   an illegal instruction with 10.2.0.   So, gcc was backed down to 9.5.0.   

   Several other packages (e.g. cairo) are downreved compared to 
   mainline CRUX.   This is due to build and or runtime isses on 
   PPC with the later package versions.   As fixes and updates are found
   for PPC, some of these packages will be brought up to current 
   versions.

   On some machines (e.g. ibook g4) volume defaults to off.   Use 
   alsamixer to set volume levels as desired on all machines.

   ibook g4 won't restart the screen from screensaver.   The machine is 
   alive but the screen stays blank.   No workaround yet other than 
   shutdown the machine rather than let it sit idle.

   The ibook mouse seems flakey.   An external mouse may be preferable.

   arcticfox remains at version 27.12.0 even though a later version is
   available.   The later version did not seem to function as well as
   27.12 so arcticfox was not upreved.    arcticfox-bin was advanced to 
   the latest (40.1) version if the later version works better for your
   use.   For both arcticfox and arcticfox-bin, Pkgfile does not properly
   download the archive so if you need to build them, download it manually
   from the arcticfox repository on github.


  Tips

   Package build times can be quite long even on faster powerpc machines.
   Allow for some hours (maybe days on slower machines) when building 
   big packages.  Ensure that your machine has the maximum RAM that it
   can support to help reduce build times.   Also some selected prebuilt 
   packages from opt (and sometimes contrib)  may be found and installed 
   from in the 'extras' section of the repository and this avoids the
   time needed to build them from source.

   Netsurf and ArcticFox browsers are provided on the install CD.   Other
   browsers (firefox, seamonkey, etc.) can be built and used if desired.
   However none of them work really well.   

   The lynx or links browser can also be installed if a text based
   browser is sufficient for the users needs.

